- Amy Matcho
- Frank DeFalco
- Erica Voss
- Lee Evans
- Don O’Hara
- Ryan Duryea
- Jen Duryea
- Marc Halperin
- Mark Danese
- Claire Cangialose
- Michelle Gleeson
- Rich Boyce


Erica recommends process documented in Wiki (http://www.ohdsi.org/web/wiki/doku.php?id=documentation:etl_best_practices)
They were able to complete the document in 3 days
The team needed longer because they needed to get up to speed with OMOP
No programming until Document is done
Divide and conquer is tricky because tables call back to each other
There is a natural progression to walking through the tables


Don agrees. Observation periods and visits come first


White Rabbit/Rabbit In A Hat to drive the process


Jen is a good candidate for specification process.  People with experience with the raw data are important in this process.


Need researchers as well (Mark) who know what they want to ask the data


Probably can knock it out in a few meetings.  (7-8 hours)  You also want the implementors present so they hear decisions being made.


We need a document owner.  Erica?  Mark?  Probably Mark.


Tools are designed to be in a room together to do first iteration, then present that result to larger group.


Lee: At point we’re ready to start ETL, what does that look like?
Don: If we had data in cloud, we could all look at it.  We might end up with several different implementations.


Mark: Can we hear about ETL implementations that currently exist?


Frank: 5-6 years ago, CDMBuilder was built in .Net and SQL-Server based.  Reality is that CDMBuilder is not for everyone.  Only works with SQL Server and that’s a hangup for some.  CDMBuilder works well in an environment that mirrors Janssen


But if we want a more agnostic solution, we’re looking at a rewrite though that would invalidate the battle-tested nature of CDMBuilder


CDMBuilder’s architecture is a good template that we could mimic in a more universal environment.


JDBC would let us connect to other DBs.  Maybe/maybe not use SqlRender.


Rich: has CDMv4 agnostified in Hibernate.  Using that to save/query tables.


Frank: using an ORM is too transactional to be performant.  Output of CDMBuilder should be flat files in the future.  Then people can use bulk loader for their specific DB.


We still need an object model to represent the data within the CDM.  Person is built as an object, then we spit them out into specific rows for the OMOP tables.


Mark: would be nice to have ETL in an accessible language that others can use.  Implementers can have a discussion on approach.


SAS?  Python? Java?


Mark: would rather do it well, rather than fast.


Frank: It’s possible to get a solid starting implementation in a few days of effort and refine as we go along.  Janssen has resources they can put towards development


Erica: getting something up and running early lets us see the data and make refinements sooner.  We have an opportunity to define how builders should be done.


Implementation group: Michelle, Don, Frank, Lee, Ryan


Lee: Deliverables?  Are we shipping the data to people itself?


Mark:  Spec, implementation, and sure, ship the data.


Don: Sees four deliverable, [Ryan’s note:  I didn’t catch what it was]


Erica: Once it’s in CDMv5, run it against Achilles so we can throw that up on the web.


Lee: I can host the Achilles results.


Don: Beneficiary summary is missing year on some file names


Ryan: Source data needs some massaging before main ETL


Don: I can massage and load into PostgreSQL.  Would have a download script that does a set of wgets to get all the files and load up the data.


Erica: Addler might have already done the loading of the raw data.  No other way to do the White Rabbit process.


Mark: Let’s contact Addler and integrate his/her efforts.  Don, Lee, Ryan, get the data loaded post-haste.  Get the white rabbit process started.  Jen, Erica, Mark, Amy, Michelle,


Amy: sometimes SQL is a good way to concisely describe a business rule


Mark: game time decision, let’s favor english unless it’s too clumsy


Amy: Maybe use SQL as short hand and someone else can english-ify it later.  Helpful for the implementers.


Everyone please email mark@outins.com so he has your email address.


Don: where do we put documents/notes/etc?


Lee: we could use the wiki?


Ryan: we could use github?


Don: GitHub ok with me.


Erica: GitHub ok with me.


Are we doing this in CDMv5?  Yes!


Mappings already exist in Vocab v5, so that’s nice.


Erica: At meeting I can walk through the tools and show people how they work.  We might need to re-run white rabbit on Don’s data.


Mark: walk us through a done one to see where we’re headed


Erica: Don, Lee, let me know about database to use


Lee: I can install white rabbit after database is up.


Mark: Meet this week, then a meeting or two when Jen gets back (Feb 16th).  Mid-March is AMIA submission.


Ryan will setup github and coordinate ETLers.
